# shooter
Violent crimes involving the use of firearms such as robberies and active shooters is an unavoidable common occurrence in the United States as a country where the amount of firearms greatly outnumbers the number of people living there. For the victims of these crimes every second could be the difference between life or death. In many cases the response time of first responders was not as fast as it could have possibly been due to people’s ability to identify the threat and notify emergency services. Similar to fire alarms which have the ability to notify the fire department when heat and smoke detectors reach a certain threshold, I imagine utilizing the security cameras that exist in most public buildings could be used to the same effect by automating the detection and classification of credible threats to notify the first responders before the first shots are even fired. 

I developed a classification model using CNN to be able to classify if a person has a firearm or cellphone in their hands. The image datasets I trained the model on had an emphasis on humans with the object in their hands rather than just the item itself as to reduce false positives from items lying around that may have a similar shape. I chose to use cellphones as they are the most commonly held item by people and have been confused with a pistol in many cases involving law enforcement shootings. I trained two CNN models, one developed from scratch and the other with transfer learning from the Resnet50 model and trained them and validated them on a 80/20 split of training and test datasets from the combined dataset of gun and cellphone users. The accuracy goal was achieved with both models at over 90% accuracy but the first model was chosen due to its lower loss indicating it was a better trained model. I set the decision threshold of the probability of a gunman at .8 as too many false alarms would result in a boy who cried wolf effect in which responding officers would lose trust in the system and not respond as quickly.
